That's the great big overall single thing. This
air movement is the one specific thing. Okay,
let's talk about the air movement that you were
telling me about yesterday. But first I have a
question. Now, you had about 1,600 men in your
battalion. Well, we had more than that when we got
into this place. Okay, when you commanded, how
many men were under your command? Well, at one
time, there were about 4,500. About 4,500? 4,500.
And you took those men and you divided them into
groups, and then you sent them out. That's right.
And how large was each group? It depended on the
mission. And it sort of depended on the
organization. A battalion... usually works best
as a battalion yeah now there there were separate
company types in the unit there were some
detachments there were some groups and it
depended on on what the mission was and where they
went we might send the group headquarters to go
along with two of its battalions to a particular
place and then another part of his as a group staff
would take the other battalion on a subsequent
mission or a mission at the same time somewhere
else. We not only divided our staff into this
diversified operation, we took our subordinate
units, which were groups and battalions, and had
them do the same thing to the degree that they were
capable of. Now, the lower the type headquarters
you get, the less you can split it up. In other
words, you couldn't split a company headquarters
and let its company go hither and yonder,
battalion less so. A group can do more so, and a
brigade could do it to a great degree. So it
depended on who and where and what the mission was.
There was no pattern. It sounds to me that this
would really increase the officers' desire and
motivation. Absolutely. Because they'd have
response. Your junior officers or your middle
grade officers would have much more
responsibility on their own than if they were just
under the general's command. Absolutely. We
utilized many of our staff officers just as I think
the T.O. and E. envisioned them. For instance,
we'd go ahead of everybody else to summer camp.
We'd go to the brigade headquarters. And we
started going to Fort Bullis, which is out of San
Antonio. We went there, and we didn't busy
ourselves at all with this year's mission. We went
there and looked at next year's mission. We were
the big planner. We planned the big picture for
next year. And the reason we went there, right next
door to 4th Army, who was our operating
headquarter. In other words, we were under Fourth
Army. And they were in control of all these areas,
see. They could say, you can go here, you can go
yonder, these people. In other words, they were
our headquarter. So we satellited right outside
of San Antonio where we could plan next year's big
picture. And then when one of the groups, for
instance, would go to Fort Bullis or, I mean, Fort
Sill or Fort Chaffee, then I'd attach one of my
staff officers to summer camp with that group to
speak for the headquarters, to be the
reconnaissance officer for the headquarters or
to interpret plans or really just to be there
They're contacted with the brigade
headquarters. But here's the group commander out
there. He's operating. He's the sole commander
there. He's running the show. And we've all gone
back home. Now, each one of these satellite
operations, and I'd go and visit them or my deputy a
day or a half a day or whatever just to see what was
going on. But we always had one of our...
headquarters officers there as a liaison officer
he didn't have any command function at all he was
not he didn't interfere with the command at all but
we fanned out and that gave them a responsibility
and gave them a feeling well I'm being used like I
ought to be used so it was a great morale builder and
it was and they've continued this program that's
right it's uh I think once or twice since then
they've pulled the brigade back pretty much
together for some specific reason, but I think the
concept is still very much like we started it. Do
you know if any other reserve units in the country
started this kind after you began this? Did
anybody else pick up? Well, I was told by Fourth
Army people that they were going to instill it in
They subsequently made it Fifth Army, and they had
the unit up in Chicago under them then. And I'm told
that they liked the idea well. Now, whether they
ever instituted it or not to the degree that we did,
I'm not sure. But they were certainly totally 100%
sold on the concept. We saved many hundreds of
thousands of dollars because we had the man hours
to spend on something, and the class one
installation engineers had some monies to buy
things with, but we made his money go a long way when
we furnished the personnel to do it with. Sure,
sure. So it, that was one of the greatest
accomplishments that I was able to help direct.
And when we sat down with them and talked about it,
they almost threw us out of the office. Never
worked. Now, tell me about your other experience.
Well, the one single thing that gave me a great deal
of satisfaction was to institute a program of
airlifting a construction company to summer
camp, along with their equipment.
They've carried troops to summer camp by air for
years. That's no feat. But I could envision
needing a construction company in Puerto Rico or
Virgin Islands or somewhere that we have a
responsibility and need to get them there.
They've never gotten on an airplane with
equipment or never loaded equipment or whatever.
So I propose to Fourth Army that we do such a thing
for something. What year was that? Do you
remember?
I don't know. We did it both the last two years.
Let's see, 70 and 71. That's probably right, 70 and
71.
I think that's right. So you reposed it about 1969.
That's correct. In fact, it may have been 68. I
worked on it for a couple of years. But I proposed we
do it, and they, again, sort of laughed at it. And it
was a different group than I sold the program
before to. They'd all gone. But they went forward
with the request and came back with a routine
refusal. So then I asked them to try it again, and it
got a few headquarters further, but it was turned
down because it said it The equipment was not
available, and the funds were not available.
In one of our diversified work programs, we had
built an 18-hole golf course for Kelly Air Force
Base. And one of the reserve Air Force commanders
there was one of the ones involved in our lesson
with Kelly Air Force Base. And we built a great
facility there. The basics. We didn't do the
refinements like the grass and some of the things
that only the golf pros can do. But we built the
bridges and the roads and the rough work on the golf
course and laid the irrigation system, built the
pro shop. We did this over a four-year period. So we
had done a great deal of work for them, just a whole
lot of work. And they would give me nearly anything
I asked for. I got a jet airplane to go to Virginia
one time just because they thought I needed it. But
anyhow, I had gotten well acquainted with this
wing commander down there at reserve. And he had
subsequently been assigned as the chief Air Force
reserve in Washington. So I had the thought, well,
I might be able to appeal to him to help me on this
program. So I saw the Chief of Army Reserve, who I
knew very well, who was a Texan, General Sutton.
Told him what I was going to do. Asked him if he had
any objection, and he said he had none. Said, just
give me a copy of your letters that you write to the
Air Force, because it's cross-service. So I wrote
to my friend in Washington, the Chief Air Force
Reserve, and told him... What was his name? Still
haven't thought of it. I'll get it. I'll get it in a
minute. And he's an Aggie. Oh, that's right. So I
wrote him a letter, and very shortly, like 10 days,
I got a response back through...
He's dead. Oh, that's right. I got a response back
through Robbins Air Force Base in Georgia, which
is reserve headquarters for some Air Force area,
probably this whole part of the United States,
can't you? They didn't say that he had written to
him or anything. They just wrote me a letter as
420th Commander and said they understood I had a
flying mission that I would like to accomplish for
summer camp. And the two questions were, where do
you want to go and what do you want to haul? So from
there, it was accomplished. We hauled a million
pounds of men and equipment to Albuquerque, to
Sandia Base. landed at Kirtland Air Force Base,
and we departed from two places, from Corpus
Christi Naval Air Station and from Bergstrom in
Austin, divided the company, part of them were
there and part of them here, and part of the
equipment, and flew them to summer camp. We let
them work for two weeks, and incidentally, the day
they got there, they unloaded their equipment and
they were working 1,000 miles away. My goodness.
So it proved the point that I was after is that we
could get in an airplane and go somewhere real
quick, be working the same day. How many men were in
on this? It was just a company size, 200 or less,
just regular engineer construction company. But
we'd put, I remember one particular load was a
motor grader and 10 men. They just got in the
airplane right with the motor grader. When the
airplane landed, they cranked up the motor grader
and drove it out of there, and they were out working
in 20 minutes. So we had, oh, I've forgotten how
many C-124s, but like 10 or 12 that went from both
Naval Air Station Now, they made one or two trips
each. They didn't fly it all at one pop. But anyhow,
it worked great. We sent the company there. At the
end of two weeks, we flew personnel home. We flew
another company of people out there, and they took
the equipment that was there and worked it for two
weeks. Then they unloaded it and brought it home.
So we really got training for two companies in a
four-week period. We got very good remarks out of
that operation. So the next year, Army provided
for us to get in on this deal. They provided the
opportunity for us to go to Florida to the
conference where they allocate airplanes for
this type of thing. We had our man down there that
told them what we needed to haul and where and all
this. They got in on that the next year and got us
down there. So we did it two years in a row. The
second year... And where did you go the second
year? Same place. Okay. Because of the fact that we
had this big, nice air base there that we could
land. And then Sandia Base is right adjacent to it
where we can work. So it is an ideal situation. The
next year, then, they gave us the C-141, the
Starlifter jet plane. And we went from the Naval
Air Station in Dallas and Bergstrom in Austin that
year. So we really coordinated with three
different takeoff points, Army, Navy, and Air
Force. And it sounds like more recently now the
American government is considering mobile Army
units and And they're talking especially with the
problems in Iran and the problems in Afghanistan,
how we need this type of mobility in our service.
And it sounds like your idea was sort of a
predecessor to that. I read that. Now, you know,
World War II had some mobile engineer equipment
that they could fly, but it was miniature stuff.
Mm-hmm. It was little stuff built for that
purpose. But my idea was taking conventional
equipment, bulldozers, motor graders,
trailers, rollers, water tanks, this type of
thing,
and go with it. Of course, we'd have to take a blade
off a dozer because it had a lot of weight and width
and all this. But it was a great mission in loading
it and tying it down Our people got right in on that.
And they were, I think they enjoyed it too. Is this
type of mission still being performed? I don't
believe it is. And I'm sure due to curtailment of
funds and various things. And I really don't
believe that they did it the year after I retired. I
think they did it, we only did it the two years, I
believe. I'm not absolutely certain, but I'm
certain they're not doing it anymore. Of course,
they're not doing a lot of things that funds make
available. Oh, sure. Absolutely. Now that we've
talked about some of your accomplishments when
you were commanding, let's talk about
shortcomings. Were there some shortcomings?
Were there some things that you wanted to
accomplish but just couldn't? Oh, there's got to
always be... person that hangs his wagon to a star
is not ever going to accomplish all the things he
wants to.
I'm not real sure that I can enumerate
specifically things that I would have liked to
accomplish. I'm
sure that our level of training could have been
better. We could have because I had more people
trained in certain ways. But to specifically
enumerate, I'm not sure. I was fortunate in
commanding during the years that we had waiting
lists for people wanting to get in. There was one or
two years that we had a little problem with
strengths, uh, nothing like they've suffered
since then. So, you know, strengths weren't
really a problem. Turnover was always a problem. I
mean, uh, you'd always got new people that
somebody was getting out, and, but, uh, and I had
some fine officers, had some fine
non-commissioned officers. Uh, I was in that
unit, uh, twenty years, I believe, twenty, Yeah,
20 years, 51 to 71. And it was a rewarding time as far
as accomplishments
and frustrations were few. We had them, but I can't
really look back and say there were a lot of things
that we ought to have done that we didn't. I know
nobody's as efficient as they'd like to be, but it
really went off well. My superiors were kind to me
and just these things that I've talked about and
working with us. Once they found out that we
weren't just blowing our horn, we could
accomplish something, they gave us the wooden
water and we spent it. Okay. Well, let's end our
conversation for this afternoon and have one more
chat Friday or so. Okay. All right.
This is a test. This is Terry Anderson. Today is
August 1st, 1980. This is the third and last
interview with General Hanover. This is a test.